J ROSS BROWNE

GO BACK AND GET PARA P26

<b>[From] Chapter 4.  Fort Yuma.</b><br><br>
<p> &nbsp; Next day Superintendent Poston and myself held a grand pow-wow with the Yuma chiefs and their people. From all parts of the neighborhood they came; warriors, squaws, and children; from the mesquit bushes and 
mudholes of the Colorado; from the sloos and the arroyas of the Gila; the cotton-woods and the deserts and the mountains of Castle Dome. Every village had its 
delegation of dusky tatterdemalions. Lizards and snakes and mice were hastily cast aside in the wild anticipation of muck-a-muck from the Great Father.  Hungry and lean,
painted and bedizened with ornaments, they came in to receive the bounty of the mighty Federal chief.
Great were the rejoicings when we opened the boxes and bales of merchandise so liberally furnished by the Government contractors, Cronin, Huxtall, & Sears, of New York. Red, white, green, and gray blankets; 
military suits, glittering with tinsel; old swords, four feet long; sun-glasses for lighting cigars; and penny whistles
for the small fry.  It was indeed a wonderful display of the artistic triumphs of civilization, well calculated to 
impress the savage tribes of the Pacific with awe and 
admiration. There were axes of the best Collins brand, that flew to pieces like glass against the iron timbers of this anomalous region; and hats made by steam, and flaming red vests stitched by magic, and tobacco-boxes and tin kettles that might be opened, but never upon earth shut again.  Surrounded by all the military paraphernalia of Fort Yuma, and with ceremony the most profound and impressive, we delivered our speeches and dry goods to the various chiefs; we gave them damaged hominy and hoes, and spades and shovels, and sashes and military 
buttons, charms, amulets, tobacco-boxes, and beads; shook them by the hand collectively and in detail, and 
pow-wowed generally in the approved style.</p>

<p> &nbsp; Pasqual, the doughty head-chief of all the Yumas, long known to fame as the longest of his tribe, predominated over the ceremonies. A grave, cadaverous, leathery old gentleman, with hollow, wrinkled cheeks, and a 
prodigious nose, through the cartilage of which, between the nostrils, he wears a white bone ornamented with swing ing pendants, is Pasqual the doughty.  On account of the length of his arms and legs--which, when stretched out altogether, bear a strong similitude to the wind-mill against which Don Quixote ran a tilt--the mighty Pasqual is regarded with much respect and veneration by his tribe.  His costume, on the present occasion, 
consisted of a shabby military coat, doubtless the same worn in ancient times by his friend, Major Heintzelman, the embroidery 
of which has long since been fretted out by wear and tear, and the elbows rubbed off by long 
collision with the multitudes of offïce-seekers among his tribe. Of pantaloons he had but a remnant; and of boots or shoes he had none at all, save those originally furnished him by nature. But chiefly was Pasqual conspicuous for the ponderous bone and appendages that hung from his
nose.	A slight catarrh afflicted him at the time of our pow-wow, and it was not without great inconvenience that he managed the ornamental part of his 
countenance--turning repeatedly away to blow it, or adjust the 
awkward pendants that swung from it, and always 
reappearing with tears of anguish in his eyes.	I took pity upon his sufferings and gave him some snuff, assuring him it
was a sovereign remedy for colds in the head.	The 
result was such a series of explosions, contortions of the facial muscles, and rattling of the ornamental bones, as to alarm me for the sanity of the doughty chief, who seemed quite wild with the accumulation of his agonies. The assembled wisdom of the nation grunted repeatedly in token of amazement; and Pasqual muttered, between the paroxysms of his affliction, "Ugh! muchee pepper belly strong dust!	Burn 'um Injun nose!"</p>

<p> &nbsp; Vincente, the next chief in command, dressed in a blue  cotton shirt of the scantiest pattern. It reached only a short distance below his waist, and, for the matter of 
respect to the prejudices of civilization, might have ended
at the collar.	I really wish the contractors would furnish 
longer shirts for the Indians.  The Yumas are tall, and I know of no tribe on this coast averaging only 
fourteen inches from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet.	Vincente had probably received a hint that the 
distribution would be honored by the presence of ladies. What he lacked in costume he made up in paint.  Both  his eyes were encircled with yellow ochre; blue streaks adorned his cheeks; his nose was of a dazzling 
vermilion, and his legs were gorgeously striped with mud. His only additional article of costume, visible to the eye, was a dusky cotton diaper, ingeniously tied behind, 
leaving a long tail to flutter majestically in the breeze.</p>

<p> &nbsp; Tebarro, the next great chief, wrapped himself in an American blanket, and dyed his face a gloomy black.	I think he was in mourning.	He wore tar on his head, and tar on his cheeks, and tar on his nose and chin, which becoming mingled with the grit and dust of the 
Colorado desert, gave him a sort of asphaltum look, like the house-tops and pavements of Los Angeles. When he stood in the sun he melted-such was the force of his grief.	Black tears ran down from his head and cheeks and chin, and mingled with the wool of his blanket. Literally he wept tar.</p>

<p> &nbsp; Antonio, the fourth great chief, wore a strap round his
waist, with a rusty old sword tied to it by means of 
rawhide. He didn't wear any thing else, save the usual 
girdle of manta upon his loins, that could be considered an article of costume; but his eyes were gorgeously 
encircled by a cloud of blue paint fringed with vermilion. Like his illustrious superior, Pasqual, he wore pendent ornaments in his nose, of the most inconvenient pattern. I should judge Antonio carried a quarter of a pound of native jewelry, consisting of bone and lead, upon the 
cartilage of his proboscis.</p>

<p> &nbsp; Juan, the fifth and last of noted warriors and head-men, was redundant in gamoose breeches and cotton rags.  On his head he wore a helmet of Colorado mud, dried into the roots of his hair by the action of the sun. This I believe is accounted by the Yumas a sovereign remedy for vermin. The liveliest skipper is forever deprived of locomotion by the conglomerate of dried mud.  When the helmet is broken off in segments, like a piece of baked crockery, it must present a curious spectacle of embalmed bodies.</p>

<p> &nbsp; These distinguished chiefs and their people received the presents allotted to them with great dignity and good-humor.	There was no grabbing or stealing, nor any sign of discontent.  Every man received his share with satisfaction, and with gratitude to the Great Father in Washington.  When they shook hands with us for the last time, and we were about to part, the scene was really affecting.  I almost shed tears at it myself, 
unused as I am to crying about what can't be helped.	In squads, and couples, and one by one, they affectionately took their leave, with their hoes and axes, spades and shovels, gimcracks and charms stuck all over them--in their sashes, breeches, clouties, blankets, and pinafores. One went with a necklace of mattocks around his neck and three Collins axes in his girdle; another with his head tlwust into a glittering pile of tin-ware; while a third, one of the unbreeched multitude, wore a flying pan in front by way of an apron, and a corn-hoe behind, in

the usual fashion of a rudder.	Old men and young were tuning their jews'-harps; luxurious squaws were peeping at the redundant beauties reflected by their little zinc looking-glasses ; children were blowing their tin whistles, and small fat papooses were hanging their heads out of compressed bundles behind their mothers, wondering, with open mouths and great round eyes, what could be the cause of all the hubbub.	It was an impressive scene of barbarous happiness not easily forgotten. And sa ended the Grancl Pow-wow.
separate inclosures, 1000 ; total population, 6000.	In 1858, the first year of the Overland 1~Iai1 Line, the surplus crop of wheat was 100,000 pounds, which was purchased by the Company ; also a large quantity of beans called ta~eris, and a vast quantity of pumpkins, squashes,
and melons.	In 1859 Mr. St. John was sent among them as a Special Agent with a supply of seeds and some agri
etxlturalimplements.	Thatyear they-sold 250,000 pounds of v>heat and a large supply of melons, pumpkins, and
beans.	In 1860 they solvl 400,000 pounds of wheat-all the Mail Company would purchase. They had more, and furnished the Government and private teamsters all
that was necessary for transportation from Fort Yuma to Tucson. I3eyoud this they had no market, except for about 40,000 pounds of wheat which l~Ir. White pur chased for the supply of Fort I3reckenridge.	In 1861 they sold to Mr. White 300,000 pounds of wheat, 50,000 pounds of corn, 20,000 pounds of beans, and a large amount of dried and fresh pumpkins, which was all in~ tended for the supply of the California column. The greater part of this crop was destroyed or given back to the Indians by the Texans under the guerrilla, Hunter, who arrived at the Pimo villages that year, robbed Mr. White of his property, and took him prisoner in their flight to the Ilio Grande.	The Pimos sold, during the same year, 600 chickens and a large amount of other stuff, showing a gradual increase of production under the encouragement of an increased demand.	In 1862 they sold to the Government over a million pounds of wheat, included in which was a portion of the previous year's crola, returned to them by the Texans.	They furnished pinole, chickens, green peas, green corn, pumpkins, and melons for the entire California cohxmn, subsisting nearly a thousand men for many months.	In 1863 they furnished the Government with 600,000 pounds of wheat, and disposed of about 100,000 pounds made into flour and sold to miners and traders.	Their crop was smaller thari usual, ov~~ing to the breakage of their main acequia at a critical period of the season, and ïn .Tanuary, 1864, they were nearly out of wheat, but still had a good supply of other products.
It will thus be seen that the Pimos are not a race to be despised. They have always proved themselves hood warriors, and have been uniformly• successful in resisting the incursions of the Apaches.	Their villages have afforded the only protection ever given to American citizens in Arizona.	If it were not for the Pimos and Maricopas it would now be impossible to travel from Fort Yuma to Tucson.
IIE 1lmerican is not the only race subject to trouble iu the various operations of mining.	Even the Celesti.zls, who occupy the neglected nooks and corners of the xninural renions, have their share of adversity and disaster in the lmrsuit of wealth.	Whénever they strike
a good claim it belongs to some white man.	He may never have seen or heard of it, or may have abandoned it and gone elsewhere; but if " John Clinaman" strikes it rich lie comes b:zck or sends his partner to take pos session.	The Di,;ger Imliaus are learning the great lesson of civilization from their l~merican benefactors. Driven from gulch to canon iu their own countiy, they aee that "Dlelican man" claims mines and minerals on general lwinciples, and, like hint, they despise an inferior race.	They hate the Chinese because " Chinanzan squaw ; no kill Injnn like 11lelic:zn man!" Tlvey seem to look upon the Celestials as a base imitation of the Indian race, without the redeeming quality of bravery.	I~euco the lliggers are sin,nlarly bitter in their hostility to these miserable interlopers, and tas them without mercy, or kill them whenever they get a chance.	One Indian chief and his band made several thousand dollars last summer by following np the Chinese and compelling them, by force of arms, to pay taxes for the privilege of working the mines.	Poor John is taxed by the State, by the Government, by every white hiltirim who jugs along with pick and shovel, by his own people, and finally by the Di~~~er Indians.	Sometimes he rouses himself up to a spirit of resistance ag:ziust the exorbitant chime
of the latter, and then ensues a scene to which no pencil s:we th:zt of Hogarth cuuld do justice.
l'he aborigir_al tax-ccllectors come along stealthilyone, two, or three at a time, till ten or a dozen of them are gathered about the camp of the Celestials. Their arms consist of a bow and arrow, and a rude club or a spear ; and their costume is seldum more than a deerskin, or a ragged old blanket, with the merest pretense of a cincture round the loins. A wretched tatterdem:zlion set they are-poor, thriftless, and dirty; in no respect like the warrior chiefs of Mr. Fenimore Cooper, or the
braves of the Ilon. Augustus Murray.	Still there is fight
in them if pushed to the bank.	Their contempt for the
Chinese is sublime.	Having no knowledge of the Dlongolian language, it becomes necessary that they should speak English, which is the available means of commzmication with the trespassers.
" Say, John !" s:zys the Digger Chief, " what you do here ?"
"DIe workee.	jVho yon?"
" 11Ie Pizzte Cal>pen.	Me kill plenty Melican man.
Dis my lan'.	Yon payee me, John.	No payee me, gottam, me killee you !"
" No got - velly poor Chinamau ; how muchee you want ?"
" Fifty dollar."
" No got fifty dollar-velly poor.	Melican ~ man hu catches Chinaman ; he makes Chinaman pay ; no got
fifty dollar.	Melican man"
" D-n Melican man ! me no sabbe Melican man ! Me Pirate Cappen. S'pose you no payee me fifty dollar, me killee you !"
Generally the money is paid, after many protests and various lamentations ; but where the Digger force is small, and the Celestials numerous, the cry of battle is raised, and then comes the tug of war. tiVhen Greek meets Greek the spectacle may be very impressive ; when
Chinauran meets Digger it is absolutely gorgeous !	Ne
~otiation has been prolonged without issue ; the English luuguage has been exhausted ; the fight is inevitable. I1'rorn every hole in the earth the valiant Celestials rush forth, armed with picks and shovels, tin pans, platters, gongs, and kettles-every thing that can be made available for warlike purposes in the emergency of the moment. They beat their pans, blow their wind instruments, shriek, shout, laugh, make horrible faces, and perform the roost frightful antics, in the hope of striking terror into the racks of the foe. In every conceivable way they tax invention tQ make themselves hideous ; poke their tongues out ; double themselves up ; hop on one leg ; squat on the ground like frogs ; rush furiously toward the enemy,
and furiously retire.	The hills and forests resound w-itlz their barbarous cries and the deafening cl:ztter of their tin kettles and Bungs.	Meantime the Diggers are not iMle.	Adepts in the artifices of barbarian w-ar, they are in no degree intimidated by the ferocious demonstra
tions of the enemy.	A pistol or a shot-gun has its terrors, but they are zzp to the flimsy substitute of load
noises and empty threats.	While the foe is thus wasting his vital powers upon the air, Digger goes in with
his clubs, spears, or bows and arrows.	A few pricks of the barbed instruments generally ends the battle-save when the Celestial party can muster up an old shot-gun or a pistol, in which case they fight with heroic despera
tion, and sometimes come off victorious.	But a pistol or gun in the hands of the enemy brings them to terms very speedily-and thus are they forced to pay the tax that
breaks the camel's back.	It ought to be a consolation to them to know that they do it for the benefit of civil
i:sation.	Every dime they pay benefits some white whisky-dealer in Virginia City or Carson, or some other civilized place.
r ,	,	c . _ i ______..~P :., al„, ~.„..,rvn;r,fr slrPtnh-
TIIIS pleasant little history of captivity, suffering, and love, so impressively associated with the wild region through which we were passing, will be appropriately followed by the romance of an unprotected American female whom we found at the old Mission of Cocospera. All along the road we heard vague rumors of the adventures and exploits of this remarkable woman, who seemed to be ubiquitous, and to possess at least a dozen different names.	Even the Mexicans, when they spoke of her, did so with a smile and a shrug of the shoulders, as much as to say she was " some" even in that country. A party of Americans whom we met at Imuriz, on their way from IIermosillo, prepared us to expect at Cocospera
a valuable addition to our transport.	They hinted at " a whole team" that was awaiting our arrival there, but warned us to be careful how we undertook to harness that team, as it was rather disposed to kick and bito.	I must confess it was with considerable trepidation that I set out from our camp in the valley to make a sketch of the old Mission.
A more desolate-looking place than Cocospera does not perhaps exist in Sonora. A few Mexican and Indian huts, huddled around a ruinous old church, with a ghostly population of Greasers,Yaqui Indians, skeleton dogs,and seedy sheep, is all that attracts the eye of a stranger tinder the best circumstances.	Yet here lives the fatherin-law of Yesquiera, Governor of Sonora-a poor old man, with a half-Indian family of children, of whom Pesquiera's wife is one.	At the date of our visit the Apa-
ches had just cleaned out the community of nearly all the cattle and sheep it possessed, killed one man, and filled the souls of the remainder with fear and tribulation, so that the place presented a very depressed appearance. '1 o this there was but one exception-that of our heroine, the unprotected American female. I found her sittïng ulrun .v pile of adobes outside a dilapidated Mexican hovel, humming over in a lively strain some popular dit ty of the times.	Poston seemed disposed to evade the responsibility of his position as commander-in-chief of the party by introducing me to her as a gentleman of a literary turn, who had taken a lively interest in her history. She immediately arose and grasped me by the hand ; I was just the roan she was looking for.	By-the
way, hadn't she seen me in Frisco ?	My countenance was
familiar.	Didn't I keep bar on Dupont Street ?	No ? Well, by jingo ! that was funny.	She was very glad we had come, anyhow; shook us by the hand again very cordially ; had been expecting us for several da3-s ; wanly ed to make tracks from Cocospera as soon as possible ; was getting tired of the society ; good enough people in their way, but had no snap about them.	So liked peo
ple with snap.	These Nlesicans ~rere dead-alive sort of cusses.	The men had no grit and the women no jingle. Thought, upon the whole, Cocospera was played out, and would prefer going to Santa Cruz.	She claimed to be a native of Georgia, and was strong on Southern rights. Said she had prospected awhile in Australia, and bobbed around Frisco for the last few years.	Got tired of civilization, and came doß-n in the steamer to Grryamas last July in company with' a friend," who left her at blagdalena.	Another ~~friend" brought her up here and went
~~ a prospecting."	She had claims, and expected they would turn out rich; but, hang it all, she didn't care a cuss about the mines.	The excitement pleased her ; it was so jolly to be knockin' around among the Apaches ! tiVouldn't she like to skelp some of 'em; you bet she'd make forked meat of their ears if she once got a show at
'em !	She didn't speak Spanish ; had been eight days at this infernal place among a set of scallywags who didn't
understand her lingo.	Vas about ready to change her location ; didn't care a flip where it was, so there was fid <lles around the premises.	`Vas a photographer by profcssiun ; that was played out ; dull work ; didn't pay.
Hadn't any instruments at present, and wouldn't photograph scallywags anyhow. Ileigh-ho ! Rickety Jo ! Great country this !
Such was the style of address of this astounding female. She was sharp, thin, and energetic, not very old, and comparatively good-looking. After she had shown us around the town, making various sparkling comments upon the natives and their style of living, she ushered us into the church, smiling contemptuously at the sacred daubs on the walls.
" Look-a-here !" said she, mounting a pile of rubbish and hauling out a couple of grinning skulls from an alcove ; " that's what we're all coming to. Them's monks. Don't they look jolly?"
I must confess I was a little shocked at her levity, and mumbled over something about the dust of the dead.
" Bosh !" cried the lively female ; " what's the odds, so long as we're happy ! Your skull and mine, and the skulls of a dozen more of us, may be foot-balls for the Apaches before a week."
I turned away and signalized Poston that we had better retire to camp.	In the evening we had the honor of
a visit from our fast friend.	She stepped with a grand swagger into camp, nodded familiarly to the soldiers, and said, " Them's the boys I like to see."
Poston's buffalo-robe was spread on the ground close by our ambulance.	Without the least hesitation she took possession of it, merely observing, " I like this.	It suits me.	A fellow can sleep like a top in such a bed as this !" From time to time, as she gave us the benefit of her ideas touching the world and things generally, she laughed heartily at the figure she would cut in society, sunburnt, freckled, and dressed as she was ; and varied the interest of the occasion by singing a few popular songs, and reading choice selections of poetry from a book which she pulled out of a satchel belonging to one of the party.
Having thus cast a glow of inspiration over the young
er members of our command, she suddenly jumped up exclaiming, " hurrah, boys !	Let's stir up the town ! Who's got a fiddle?	By jingo, we'll have a fandango !" . Nobody had a fiddle, but there was a guitar in camp, and it was not long before the fandango was under a fall head of steam.	Greasers, Yaqui Indians, soldiers, and senoritas were at it full tilt, amid all the noise and din and horrible confusion of a genuine Spanish bade.	The fast woman jumped and capered and pirouetted in a style that brought down the horse ; and it was long after midnight when our part of the company began to straggle into camp.	'
As there was no room in the ambulance even for so entertaining a companion, the proposition to transport her to some point of greater security on American soil was submitted to our gallant young Lieutenant, commander of the escort. The question was debated in camp, Was an American woman to be left by an American party in the midst of an Apache country ? IIad her character any thing to do with the question of humanity or the duty of placing her at some point where her life would be secure ?	Of course not.	Go she must and go
she did, in the baggage-wagon.	All along the road, in the wildest and most dangerous places, she popped her head out at intervals to see how things in general were flourishing ; twitted the " boys " on their style of riding ; sang snatches of Opera, and was especially great on ballads for the multitude.
°` ° When this cruel was is over,"'
she would scream at the top of her voice, " You bet I'll go to Frisco, a kiting, a kiting,
"`As the swallows homeward fly."' Thus she entertained us, and thus she clung to us ; takiyg a grip upon our unfortunate Lieutenant that seemed likely to oblïterate him from the face of the earth.	She jolted and jogged along in the baggage-wagon to Santa Cruz, and didn't like the place ; she rattled on to the San
Antonio rauclx, anM didn't yearn to stay there; she jingled away to Tubac, and considered it too infernally dull for a coyote or a wild-cat. In fact, she rather enjoyed sloshing around, and manifested a desire to accompany our expedition tlu~oughout the entire range of our trav els.	It was abundantly evident to ua all that she was inspired wit}z a romantic attachment for our gallant Lieutenant.	The shafts of Cupid began to shoot from her glittering eyes, and their fatal influence became fearfully perceptible.	He grew pale and weary ; was fretful and impatient ; and seemed like a man burdened with heavy cares.	After a week or so it became necessary to semi the wagon down to Tucson for a fresh supply of provisions.	The Lieutenant brightened np; a happy thought struck him ; he would shuffle off this incubus that hung upon him like a millstone.	What excuse he made I never could learn, but he packed up our enterprising female, addressed a note to the officer in command at Tucson, stating the causes which had induced him to give her transportation, and sent her to that tropical region, which }ze thought would be congenial to her tastes.	The last I heard of her she was enjoying the hospitality of our vaquero.
_ J	_J _ .	__ D .. _ _ _	._ __ ._ __~_____.„- -__-,___. The only ln'oduction against which there seems to be no limit, and certainly no effective law, is that of children. Owing to the climate, perhaps, and idleness, which is the father of all mischief and many mixed breeds of lrtliies, these mongrel little humans abotmd to an amazing extort in the small towns of Sonora.	Nearly all of t}tent have Indian blood in them, and many denote a growing proclivity toward the American race. Ilertce yon often see in one family a remarkable variety of races. 1~ nu~ther with white-headed and blue-eyed children, and hlaol:-heaMal aml black-eyed children, and children with strai;;lit hair, and curly hair, and thin lips, and thick like, and noses ion;, aml noses short, all bearing a strong f;unily resemblance, is a very common kind of mother in this latitude. Occasionally some beneficent Padre goes thruu~lt the cuuntry duing ult a lung arrearage of mur-
riages, putting together in the holy bonds of wedlock all who desire to secure by the rites of the Church the partners with whom trey chance at the time to be on terms of domestic- intimacy. For this reason I drink Sonora can beat the world in the production of villainous races. Jlisc+egenation has prevailed iu this country for three
t~~ i~turies.	Every generation	the	population grows w~~rse; and t}re Sonoraniarrs may now be ranked with tlwir natural compadres-Indians, burros, and coyotes. 'flue worst of the whole combination of races is that ,~ l ~ ieh has the infusion of rascality in it from American
~~ ~~irces.	Mexican, Indian, and American blood concentrated in one individual makes the very finest specimen of a murderer, thief, or gambler ever seen on the face of the earth.	Nothing in human form so utterly depraved can be found elsewhere.	I know of no exception, and do not believe a good citizen of sound morals ever resulted from such an abominable admixture.	Of suchmaterial
as this is the town of Dlagdalena composed.	It is said to be a very quiet and orderly place compared with Hermosillo,and I can well believe the statement; for wLile 1Vlagdalena has not been much favored with the presence of renegade Americans within the past few years, Hermosillo has long been their favorite place of resort, chiefly because it affords a more extensive field for the exercise of all the depraved passions of human nature.
We remained about two days in l~lagdalena, during which we greatly enjoyed the hospitality of our friend Gonzales Torraûo. It is due to this gentleman to say, that he has done more for the accommodation of American travellers on their way through Sonora, and afforded them more assistance in procuring supplies of implements and provisions for their mining operations than any man in the country.	IIe has done this without profit or reward, chiefly from the natural promptings of his heart, and incidentally from a liberal and intelligent desire to see the resources of this vast mineral region luoperly duvelupud.
It is evident to any one passing through Sonora, even as far north as we did, that a great change is going on throughout the State. Every steamer from San Francisco lands at IVIazatlan and Guyamas from 100 to 200 passengers, many of whom, disappointed in more northern regions, desire to establish themselves in the rich mineral fields of the south. Political disaffection toward their own Government may have something to do with this influx of Americans within the borders of Sinaloa and Sonora ; but I would not like to say any thing vindictive on that point-especially as most of these enterprising adventurers are at present without money, and not a few of them dependent upon the charity of the Mexicans, who complain that they are obliged to support them.	Quite a number of the more energetic, however, are making an honest living by driving teams, blacksmithing, or doing rough jobs of painting and housework.	As yet but few have derived any income from the silver mines, though all are pretty rich in claims. In respect to mines, owning silver lodes in 1~Icxico is
a pretty precarious business at present.	In Sonora, at
least, there is too much mescal and too little law.	The
uv uuc vuw,u.
I was interested in taking some views of the scenery in the Cocospera by Mr. Bartlett's romantic narrative of the captivity and sufferings of Doua Inez, a young Mexican gir}, whose family were murdered in this canon about twelve years ago, and herself captured and held iq bondage by the Apaches for fifteen months, subject to the most cruel treatment. News of her captivity having reached Mr. Iiartlett during his service as Boundary Commissioner, he made a demand upon Mangus Colora do,the Apac•,he chief, for her release.	The answer was insolent and characteristic-that it was none of his business ; this was a matter between the Apaches and tho Mexicans.	bIr. Bartlett explained that under the treaty Between his Government and Mexico the oflicers of the ZTnited States were bound to aid the authorities of Sonora in suppressing Indian hostilities ; that this was a very flagrant case, and if the girl was not at once de}ivered up he would proceed to take her by force.	Having a strong party to back np his demand, it was deemed prudent by the cunning Apache to comply with it, and
Dona Inez was reluctantly delivered to the Commissioner, who turneM her over to Captain Gourez, of the 1Vlexican army, then commandant at 'l'ubac. It was admitted by all that Mr. Bartlett had manifested a most praiseworthy and chivalrous interest in the misfortunes of this young wuman.	At the teixler age of fifteen she Imd seen her relatives murdered before her eyes ; had been dragged over mountains and deserts by ruthless savages ; had suffered the most cruel barbarities at their hands ; and was now once more, by the exertions of this humane American, restored to her friends and to civilization.
The delicate and chivalrous conduct of Mr. ßartlett toward the fair captive can not be too lighly estimated, considering her beauty aml the pecaliar ciroumstanees of her career. Far different was the course of Captain Gourez, who, upon finding a beautiful young woman placed in his charge-of his own country too-fell desperately in love with her, and, contrary to all the rules of propriety, took her to lodge in his own quarters.	When Mr. Bartlett next heard of her she was the idol and the ornament of the house of Gourez, who loved her not wae
ly but too well to marry her, having already a wife in the city of Mexico. This breach of duty and implied faith arôused the indignation of our Commissioner, who had so nobly rescued and delicately cherished the divine Inez; and it is currently stated in Arizona that he made it a subject of official protest to the Governor of Sonora and a letter of serious complaint to the Bishop.	The Governor and Bishop, as I am told, were greatly mortified at the conduct of Gourez; but upon receiving his explanation, which was to the effect that his wife was still living, and would be very unhappy if he married another woman, they acquitted him of all blame in the matter, and Dona Inez continued to enjoy the hospitality of his mansion.
The sequel of the romance I find recorded in my own note-book.	Dona Inez is married and settled at Santa Cruz.	IIer husband is not Captain Gourez.	I called at her house in company with Mr. Poston, and had an interview with her on the subject of her captivity among the Apaches.	She had heard of the narrative of her adventures written by Mr. Bartlett, but had never seen his book.	She spoke kindly and gratefully of her deliverer. On the subject of her treatment by the Apaches she was somewhat reserved.	Her husband was much more communicative.
Doîia Inez is now about twenty-seven years of age, though she looks older.	IIcr features are thin, sharp, and care-worn, owing to ill-health.	Possibly she may have
been pretty in her youth.	Mr. Bartlett thought so, and
he ought to be a judge.	IIe saw a great deal of beauty unadorned in his tour of exploration.
.,.,.,w„..,.,W..~, N..., ~..., .,Hrr..r .U ~~W. „~ ..,.... u..	-~ ~w..~.
I thought I had seen the concentration of filth, laziness, and inanity, and the perfection of vicious mixtures of races at Imnriz and Magdalena; but Santa Cruz caps the climax. The more southern towns possess at least the advantage of a genial temperature, and it is not unhleasant to see people enjoy the dolce,fizr niente, even if they indalge in it to excess. The chilling climate of Santa Cruz sweeps away all the dreamy illusions of indolence, and reduces the inhabitants to a condition of tor por depressing to witness.	Too inert to stir abort and gather suflic;ient waod for a comfortable fire, a genuine native of this region sits shivering all day long over three twigs of mesquit, his dirty serape drawn up over his shoulders, his skin a bilious black yellow, tlve inevit:rble cigarrito in his month ; a score of starved coyote curs snapping around his heels ; no gleam of hope in his eye, no spark of ambition iu his nature-a dreary spectacle of wretchedness and inanity. -
~sk him the simplest question, and the -extent of his knowledge is quie7a Babe 2	IIis whole life is a gesien sabe business, signifying nothing.	The world can not afford a more delwess-ing specimen of degraded humanity.
