Mary Halleck Foote, "A California Mining Camp"
Scribner's Monthly  February 1878

<p>The Mexican camp has little of that bustling energy which belongs to its neighbor on the floor below. It wakes 
up slowly in the morning,--especially if the morning be cold,--and lounges abroad on moonlight nights, when 
guitar-tinklings sound from the shadowy vine-flecked porches. The barest little cabin has its porch, its 
climbing vines and shelf of carefully tended plants. Dark-eyed women sit on the door-steps in the sun 
braiding a child's hair, perhaps, or chattering to a neighbor, who leans against the door-post with a 
baby half hidden in the folds of her shawl. They walk up and down the hilly street, letting their gowns 
trail in the dust, their heads enveloped in a shawl, one end of which is turned up over the shoulder; 
the smooth, sliding step corresponds with the accent in speaking. In passing, they look at you with a 
slow, grave stare like that of a child. All, even to the babies, have an air of repose; crudeness of 
voice or manner is almost unknown among them.</p>
<P>The first time I went down into the mine one of the men of the party, as is the custom, passed a 
bottle of whisky among the men in each "lab&oacute;r" we visited. The Cornish men drank in a hearty, 
unconstrained fashion enough, but each Mexican, before raising the bottle to his lips, turned to the 
two women of the party with a grave inclination and a Buena salud, Se&ntilde;oras! . . .</p>

<br>
<hr width="55%">
<br>
<p> &nbsp; &nbsp; My last visit to the Mexican camp was during the yellow hazy July weather; it was 
after a fire had swept away all the houses lying below and around the rock, which rises like a fortress 
at the north-west end of camp. The bare sun-baked rock stood out, with all its reddish-yellow lights 
and purple-brown shadows, in strong relief against the solid blue of the sky. Down its sides were the 
blackened lines of brick which marked the foundations of the ruined houses. Below, was the little street 
silent and deserted, with its quiet afternoon shadows stretching across it. It seemed old enough for 
anything. It might have been a little Pompeiian street lying so still in the broad sunlight, under that 
intensely blue-bright sky. I sat under the shadow of a Mexican cabin on the high bank overlooking the 
street. A little girl named Amelia, too slight and small to carry the child she held wrapped in an 
old shawl, stood beside me and told me the Spanish words for rock, and sky, and picture, and the names of 
her brothers and sisters. The mother, leaning on the railing of the rough balcony above, smiled down at me 
and counted them on her fingers--six in all--and then crossed both hands on her breast with a proud and 
gentle gesture of triumph in the possession of the six. The cheerfulness of the whole family,--brown, ragged, 
ill-fed, sickly and numerous as they were,--a cheerfulness which implied no hope or even understanding of 
anything better, was the saddest thing in the whole of that warm, sunny desolation.</p>

<p> &nbsp; &nbsp; 
Early morning at New Almaden is worth getting up betimes to see. Sometimes the valley is like a great 
lake filled with billows of fog,--pearly white billows, tumbling and surging with noiseless motion. It 
is more as if the clouds had all fallen out of the sky, leaving its blue intensity unbroken, and heaping 
the valley with fleecy whiteness. On windy mornings, the fog rolls grandly out to sea along the defiles 
of the triple chain of hills; when there is no wind, it rises and drifts in masses over the mountains, 
making the clear sunlight hazy for a moment before dissolving into it. After the rains, when the morning 
air has a frosty crispness, the mountains are outlined in sharp, dark blue against a sky of reddishgold; 
even the tops of the distant red-woods may be traced, "bristling strange, in fiery light," along the 
horizon. As the sun lifts its head, the dark blue hills flush purple, long shadows stream across the 
valley, the windows and spires of San Jose sparkle into sight, and the bay reveals itself, a streak of 
silver in the far distance. There is no chorus of birds to break the stillness. . . .</p>
<br>
<hr width="55%">
<br>
CHINESE
<p> &nbsp; &nbsp; I was not encouraged to investigate that camp of Chinamen below the hill, but 
once we went to "China Sam's" to buy a lantern. . . . [H]is wife . . . seemed not more than fourteen years 
old--a mere child with the smallest hands. She carried a baby slung at her back in the folds of a dark-red 
silk scarf, which was crossed over her breast. The baby had a tiny black cap worked with embroidery on 
its head,--a chubby little thing, fast asleep, swaying from side to side as the small mother trotted about. 
She examined my dress, hands and ornaments, and, pointing to her baby, put her fingers on her under 
teeth and held up two fingers to tell me it had two teeth. Whenever I tried to say anything to her 
she laughed and said, "No sabe." She was very delicately formed, her hands small as a child's and 
perfect in shape, yet when she took one of mine to look at a ring which had caught her eye, I felt 
uncomfortable at the touch of those slim, tawny fingers. She offered a cigar to my companion, which 
he accepted and held carefully, but as we left the house, I noticed that he tossed it into the bushes. 
In an inner closet where the day was shut out, we saw the glimmer of candle-light on some brilliantly 
colored papers on the wall. This was the family altar.</p>

<p> &nbsp; &nbsp; Several years ago Sam was head cook at the boarding-house on the "Hill." Another 
Chinaman tried to get his place by underhand means. Sam carefully noted his movements; there was a 
journey to San Jose, which ended badly for the other Chinaman, and not too well for Sam, as he was 
tried soon after for murder. He spent a few months in jail, but he had only killed another Chinaman, 
and he was an excellent cook,probably a much better one than his rival,--so he was finally acquitted. 
Two or three years ago he sent to China for his wife; she excused herself from coming on the plea of 
being too old for so long a journey, and sent this young girl instead. Sam says his young wife is "heap fool! 
Allee time play chile [with the child]!" and he beats the "chile" because it is a girl.</p>
