BEAUTIFUL for situation is the lovely little city of Hannibal, on the 
Mississippi, the boyhood home of Mr. Samuel L. Clemens, known the worl over as 
"Mark Twain." The hills are high, the valley is picturesque, the houses are 
handsome and comfortable. The town claims a population of fifteen thousand, and 
is just now enjoying a boom, recent discoveries of deposits having been made 
that will greatly enrich the place. On a late visit I endeavored to gather some 
information regarding Hannibal's "first citizen," with the following result.
    Mr. Clemens must have been acquainted with Hannibal for a long time, for he 
has recently said that he has known the place ever since "Lovers' Leap" was a 
mole-hill and the Mississippi River a small creek.
    The local tradition remembers the father of the humorist, "Squire" Clemens, 
as a good and peaceable citizen. He brought to the town with him his wife and 
children, and nothing unusual is remembered of the family, except that Mrs. 
Clemens had a peculiar and interesting drawl in her speech. When her son 
lectured in the town theater she called the attention of the neighbors to the 
fact that "Sam had a mighty long drawl to his talk, and she wondered where in 
the world he had got it." Whereupon an old farmer remarked, "If the dam is a 
pacer, you will very likely find an amble in the colt." They brought up their 
children as well as circumstances would allow, considering three things, the 
Civil War, the West on the river, and the children. It is generally believed 
that "Aunt Polly," in "Tom Sawyer" was "Sam's" own mother, and that Tom was Sam. 
If this is so, one can almost read the family history in that captivating little 
book. . . .


    In his writings Mr. Clemens sometimes gives the real name of one of his 
characters, and one will find, upon investigation, that his picture is true to 
life. Among these, I will mention two extremes, Huckleberry Finn and Laura 
Hawkins, who figures as Becky Thatcher. One was in the lower walks of life, 
living on charity, sleeping in old barrels, and covering himself with such rags 
as might fall to his lot; the other was a beautiful, accomplished girl, a strong 
and lovely character, the pride and belle of the village. It was lately my good 
fortune to meet the lady, Mrs. F-----, whose youth was thus celebrated. She is 
happily engaged in a work of charity, and one can see by her kindly face and 
cheerful nature that she is well qualified for such a delicate and noble work. 
By Mr. Clemens's own confession, she was his first sweetheart, as may be seen by 
his wedding announcement sent to her with an indorsement in his own handwriting 
that such was the case. I had this photographed, but the passing years have so 
dimmed the words that it is difficult to decipher them. I have also procured a 
photograph of the entrance of the now famous cave, in which one can, in 
imagination, follow the steps of the two children Tom and Becky, rambling about 
the cave with candles held high above their heads, running, walking, climbing, 
peering into every dark passageway, and sometimes venturing in, until suddenly 
they realize that they have been separated from the other members of the party 
and are lost. . . .


    Mr. Clemens holds a safe place in the affections and esteem of the citizens 
of Hannibal. His name is a household word, a possession of local pride, and all 
claim a personal interest in their gifted fellow-citizen. How wonderful is the 
spell of humor! As long as boys shall climb those hills or float along the 
Mississippi, as long indeed as the English language is read, the name of "Mark 
Twain" will be known and honored, and the mere mention of the humorist will 
serve to bring a smile to the face of sorrow and lighten the burdens of many a 
weary life.