
Admirers of Mark Twain were collecting his books and autographs
during his lifetime, and after the 1911 auction of several hundred
books from his library, the popularity of collecting of relics
associated with Twain also grew. Most of these collectors were
drawn to Twain because of his writings, and most of their
collecting interest focused on his writings and things directly
associated with his literary works.

But Twain's influence has not been limited to his career as a
writer. His status as a celebrity had a profound cultural impact
during his lifetime and his popular image has evolved ever since.
Many people don't know Twain through his writings, but instead have
a notion of his place in American cultural life based solely on his
image and perhaps a few dubious quotations. Twain's name and image
were used in the market place from the very beginnings of his
literary career in the 1860s until his death in 1910, sometimes
with his permission, and much more often without his knowledge. And
after his death, his name and image were used to promote products
and causes in new and even more distorted ways. 

The relics pictured here were selected from a large collection and
represent just a small portion of the surviving objects that
reflect the commercial use of Twain's name and image during his
lifetime and after. The emphasis of this collection is on materials
from Twain's lifetime, and includes far less material from the
first twenty-five years after his death, and even fewer items after
the 1935 centennial of his birth. But make no mistake: the use (and
cultural evolution) of Twain's name and image continues unabated
today.


[three dolls] The Twain doll on the left may date from Twain's
lifetime, but was certainly made no later than the 1920s. The doll
on the right is a Eubank doll made in Hannibal, Missouri in the
1930s or early 1940s by Wilma Eubank Pulliam, and the smaller doll
at center is a Courtney doll of later vintage.

[five card games] THE GAME OF AUTHORS was a popular card game,
first manufactured in 1861, and has been produced in more than 200
different versions since. By 1869, Twain was being included in
decks. The deck shown in front dates from 1873, and the other three
all picture Twain himself on the lid of the box, dating from the
1880s to 1910.

[scrapbook leaflets] Twain patented his self©pasting scrapbook in
1873 and contrary to a popular myth, it was a success. The folding
advertising leaflet at bottom is American; the pink leaflet is
English, and the catalogue at left dates from 1901 and lists the
dozens of formats and bindings available.

[scrapbooks] Twain's scrapbook came in various leather bindings, a
variety of cloth bindings, and even in pocket size manilla covers. 
[cigar boxes] Twain was widely associated with cigar©smoking, and
cigar makers found it profitable to use his image and name. The box
at left dates from 1889, the box at center from 1909, and the box
at right was first used in 1913 and was still in use in the 1930s.
The "pug" dog sitting in the middle box was a "counter card" that
sat on a drugstore counter to advertise Mark Twain Tobacco. His
back legs were hinged to allow him to "stay" all day on the
counter.

[cigarette cards] Insert cards were popular in tobacco products,
and Twain was a popular subject. The five cards at left were issued
in 1909 by Mogul Egyptian Cigarettes; the large card at center was
issued by Heppenheimer in New York in the 1880s; the three small
cards at top (from left to right) were issued by Lone Jack (1887),
Lever Brothers (1901), and Vice©Regal (1904); the two pieces at
bottom are a card and biographical booklet issued by Duke
Cigarettes in 1887; and the four cards at right were all issued by
Ogden's between 1901 and 1905.

[Olds card & Pullman card] Twain was known for his wide travels,
which made his image especially useful to those in the travel
industry. Oldsmobile used this picture postcard of Twain to
advertise their motor cars in 1906, and Pullman used Twain to
advertise it's new passenger train car in 1904. Riding the car with
Twain were Theodore Roosevelt, Thomas Edison, and others.

[3 blotters] When fountain pens were still in popular use, blotters
were an essential desk item, and were a common means of
advertising. The blotter at left dates from 1933 with a timely
quote by Twain about fear. The blotter at top for Mark Twain Coal
dates from 1952, and the blotter at bottom for Grand Rapids Plaster
(which may or may not have been used at Twain's home, Stormfield)
dates from 1911.

[MT flour] Mark Twain Flour was introduced in 1900, just two years
after this company began milling flour. Shown are two sizes of
their flour sacks, and the advertising leaflet announcing their new
brands. Mark Twain flour was made until just a few years before the
company closed in 1955.

[wooden crates] This company registered their trademark in 1918,
and began marketing Mark Twain lemons and oranges in 1923.

[shirt sign & shirt] Starting in the 1940s Mark Twain Shirts were
manufactured. This glass counter sign was designed to hold a light
bulb. Shown are a Mark Twain shirt and a pair of Mark Twain pants. 

[MT shirt advertising stuff, move this image up to this spot] Mark
Twain Shirts were advertised with tape-measures, rulers, pencil
sharpeners, notepads (with Twain quotes on each page), corkscrews,
and razors. Also shown is a pen knife advertising Mark Twain Shoes.

[boxes of Twain shirt collars] Shirts with separate collars were 
once popular (you could change and wash the collar instead of the
whole shirt). Shown are boxes of five different styles of Mark
Twain Collars made by Hall & Hartwell, who patented their Mark
Twain collar in 1921 and began production the next year. This
nearly concludes a complete Mark Twain wardrobe: shirts, collars,
pants, and shoes. We have yet to find Mark Twain socks and
underwear, and the only Mark Twain brand womens clothing we have
seen are Mark Twain mink coats.

[cookbook & oyster leaflet] Mark Twain attended many dinners,
especially toward the end of his life and was famous for his after-dinner speeches, so food makers felt entitled to his name. This
1894 cookbook includes a description of Mark Twain Beef Steak, and
the 1910 advertising pamphlet for Sealshipt Oysters includes a
story about Twain and William Dean Howells sitting down to an
oyster dinner.

[watch pamphlet] Waltham Watch Company published this Twain story
in 1918 to promote its watches.

[suffrage] Twain was an early advocate for womens suffrage and was
often quoted in the press. The poster was issued in 1910, and the
small broadside was issued in 1909 or 1910.

[3 political items] Twain's endorsement of a political cause was a
powerful force. The Twain pamphlet at left was issued in opposition
to Richard Croker, a New York mayoral candidate of Tammany Hall
fame. The pamphlet at right was issued by the New York Copyright
League in 1885 or 1886 to push for copyright reform. It carried the
facsimile signatures of Twain, Louisa May Alcott, Sarah Orne
Jewett, Joel Chandler Harris, W. D. Howells, Whittier, Holmes, and
a host of other authors. The large broadside was issued in Hartford
in 1871 and used Twain's name. Badly written, there is no internal
evidence of Twain's having anything to do with it, and it is not
mentioned in his letters or notebooks of the period; he may not
have even known his name had been appropriated.

[TS & HF game] In advertising pieces issued after Twain's death,
Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn are nearly always pictured fishing. This
board game was issued by Stoll, Edwards in 1925, and came with four
playing pieces, fifteen cards, three dice, and took the players
through various adventures.

[fishing game] This very dangerous fishing game was made by
Keystone Wood Toys in the 1930s or 1940s, and involved spring-loaded fish that could be "caught" using the two fishing poles and
lures supplied. More often than not, the fish simply spring past
the poles toward the eyes of the players. 

[comic book & crayons] Stoll, Edwards issued this comic book in
1925; the crayons date from the 1940s, and at least two different
Twain-related coloring books are also known.

[postcards] Visitors to historical sites associated with Twain 
could send postcards to their friends. The top two cards depict the
Crane home at Quarry Farm near Elmira, New York, where Twain
summered, and the study at Quarry Farm where he wrote HUCKLEBERRY
FINN. They date from 1906. The other three cards show Twain's last
home at Stormfield and date from 1908-1910, while Twain still lived
there. The top card was used by a member of the Stormfield
household. 

[Hannibal postcards] These four postcards show Twain's boyhood home
in Hannibal and date from 1904 to 1910. Three of the cards are
commercial cards sold to visitors. But the card at upper right is
an actual photograph of the home taken by a visitor who had it
printed out as a postcard.

[Hartford images] At top is a stereoview of Twain's Hartford home
by R. S. De Lamater. It dates from about 1875 when Twain was living
in the home. Stereoviews were a popular way to memorialize a visit,
and at least half-a-dozen different stereoviews of his home are
recorded. The three postcards dated from 1898-1906, some years
after Twain and his family had moved.

[Hannibal stuff, you might want to move this up near other Hannibal
items] Later visitors to Twain's boyhood home could remember their
visit with fans, license tags, ashtrays, and even a notepad holder
and miniature pencil. These tourist souvenirs date from the 1930s
and 1940s.

[Hannibal stuff, you might want to put this ahead of the previous
image of Hannibal stuff] Earlier visitors to Hannibal could buy
Wheelock China plates and sweet dishes (1902-1915) and sterling
silver spoons. This spoon is engraved 1902, the same year Twain
himself returned to Hannibal to visit his boyhood home. Also shown
are paperweights, badges, and a celluloid mirror, all dating from
1902 to 1920.

[Twain club butler set] This dust pan, crumb sweeper (known as a
silent butler), and tray were issued on January 1, 1901 for members
of the Mark Twain Club. The earliest known Mark Twain Club had been
established in Ireland in 1875, and another in New York (possibly
the club that issued this set) consisted of thirty-two members,
including twelve women. Unlike modern fan clubs, these clubs were
reading clubs that read and discussed Twain's works.

[steamboat stuff] Twain's association with steamboats dates from
the publication of LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI. The bill of lading is
from the steamboat mail packet Mark Twain that operated out of
Memphis and dates from April 23, 1882. Sometime between May 6 and
21, 1882, Twain himself saw this very steamboat as he floated down
the Mississippi toward New Orleans, and in the opening lines of
chapter 28 of LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI he expressed surprise at the
honor of having a steamboat named after him, but could not help but
add that he thought the honor was long overdue. The plate dates
from 1935, and the postcards (1902-1912) show the steamboat
rechristened in Twain's honor in 1902 when he visited St. Louis;
Twain himself piloted that steamboat around the harbor.

[sheet music] This photo of Twain sitting in a wicker chair at
Stormfield was used to boost sales of this sheet music by H. L.
Baldwin in 1911.

[impersonators] During his lifetime Twain was plagued by people who
traveled around the country impersonating him. Some did his as a
fraud and left their hotel bills unpaid. Others were legitimate
impersonators -- proto-Hal Holbrooks. As these two broadside
advertising sheets attest, Twain was in good company. These
programs included readings from Twain, Shakespeare, Harriet Beecher
Stowe, Charles Dickens, Tennyson, and Walter Scott. The larger one
dates from 1876, and the other is of the same period.

[2 advice pieces] Twain's fame as a lecturer and stage performer
made him a natural spokesman for the profession. A turn-of-the-century New England school printed Twain's advice to wannabee
writers, and the leaflet from J. B. Pond (Twain's own lecture
agent) gave Twain's advice to would-be lecturers.

[guitar lessons] Twain's quote about Hawaii was used on a variety
of printed materials that promoted the Hawaiian tourist trade, but
this appearance on a 1916 guitar instruction book is unusual.

[charity pieces] Twain lent his name to a variety of charitable
causes. The Congo Reform Association listed Twain on its 1906 fund-raising letterhead. When his lecture agent died in 1903, he helped
raise money for the widow and son left behind, and at right is
shown an invitation from Twain to his nephew for a benefit
performance of THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER.

[stock offering] In 1907, Twain name was invoked in this packet of
advertising material sent out to promote a stock offering for a
recording device that could be attached to a phone and recorded the
sound on electro-magnetic disks about the same size as modern CDs.

[Lincoln] The log cabin where Abraham Lincoln was born was sold in
1894 and dragged around the country as a side-show attraction. In
1906, Twain and some others bought the cabin and established the
Lincoln Farm Association to buy the original farm so the cabin
could be returned to its original location and preserved. Twain,
Roosevelt, Taft, Samuel Gompers, and others all signed on, and they
raised over $350,000 between 1906 and 1909. The Lincoln Farm was
made a national park in 1916. Shown here are the fund-raising
leaflet and the certificate sent to those who sent donations.

[Hawaii, you may want to move this near the other Hawaii item]
Twain's visit to Hawaii in the 1860s resulted in a quote that was
widely used to promote Hawaiian tourism. Shown here are a 1906
postcard, a 1908 tourist guide, and the first separate printing of
a Twain story printed in Hawaii in the 1920s.

[shaving stuff] This maker of shaving soap used famous faces to 
promote their product in 1903. Among the faces were Twain,
Roosevelt, Kipling, Paderewski, J. P. Morgan, Thomas Edison,
General Nelson Miles, and J. P. Bryan.

[Atlantic steamers] Twain crossed the Atlantic several times by
steamer and trans-Atlantic steamship lines used him to promote
their business. Twain wrote a letter praising the bravery of a
Cunard Line crew that saved people from a storm-tossed steamer in
1872, and in 1873 they reprinted his letter in their promotional
leaflet. In 1896 the North German Lloyd Line got hold of a Twain
letter explaining his scheme to steam back and forth across the
Atlantic writing a book, and printed it the souvenir booklet they
gave passengers.

[Donworth promos] Twain encouraged this woman to collect her
fictional letters into a book and she took his advice. She also
borrowed an extract from his speech to the Associated Press
praising her work by printing it in a promotional leaflet for her
book. Shown are the 1908 book (in dust jacket), the promotional
leaflet, and a promotional cabinet photograph of the author. Using
the words of one author to puff the writings of another was nothing
new, but Twain was victimized more than most.

[John Knox] John Knox was a famous Scotchman whose home in
Edinburgh was the oldest private residence in the city, and Twain
praised this 1898 book about Knox and his house. When a new edition
was published in 1905, Twain's letter of praise was extracted and
printed on a promotional card.

[charity, move this near other charity stuff] In 1907 the Actor's
Fund of America held a fund-raiser in New York City. Twain lent his
name to their promotional materials for the event, and even sat in
a booth signing autographs during the fair. Shown are a promotional
letter with Twain's mimeographed endorsement, and a copy of THE
ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER signed at the event by Twain, with the
sticker still present.

[in general, I'd suggest moving things into more or less
chronological order, with the Hannibal items near the end]



