   Almost everybody who fancies he knows a good thing, in the humorous way, 
when he sees or hears it, was on hand last night to assist at the debut of 
Mr. Clemens, otherwise known as "Mark Twain," as a lecturer.
   The subject announced was "Frozen Truth," but as in the case of the 
well-remembered "discursive" lecture of the lamented "Artemus Ward" upon 
the "Babes in the Wood," in which the audience were favored with only a 
single allusion to the babes, to the effect that they were the children 
of poor, but respectable parents, and died young, so in this discourse of 
last night, the promised gelid facts never made their appearance, though 
anxiously looked for by literal sort of hearers.

    The thread of the lecture was a running review of the renowned excursion 
of the New English pilgrims, per steamer "Quaker City," to the Holy Land, 
and this trip, illustrated from the "Mark Twain" point of view, afforded 
matter for the most successful attack upon the risibles. His description 
of the sea-sick pilgrims (the pilgrims he liked, but didn't dote on); of 
the aggravating doctor, who was continually making himself disagreeable 
by having the toothache and the heart disease, though remonstrated with; 
of the fellow traveller who sat up all night, on the watch for Scylla and 
Charybdis; of the breakfast with the emperor of Russia; his personal 
description of the Emperor, who treated him so kindly and frankly, 
telling him he "could leave whenever he wanted to"; his rough experience 
in Syria, the only pleasing reminiscence of which was the time he had 
the cholera in Damascus; his mathematical comparison of the proportion 
of arable land to desert in Syria, to that of the absolute lemon in the 
pies known as lemon pies, at his Washington Hotel; his warmly expressed 
detestation of the villainous camels "that were always trying to bite 
you when you hadn't done anything to 'em"; his unanswerable argument 
against matrimony found in the fact that the Sultan "has 900 wives 
and isn't happy"; his adcaptandum appeal to his bachelor auditors 
apropos to this muchness of matrimony, "How would you like your 
sleeping apartment lumbered up with a bed six feet long and thirteen 
hundred feet wide?"; his comparison of the public institutions, buildings 
and monuments of the U.S. to those of the Old World; his proud claim that 
no quarter of the Old World has such a monument as the Washington Monument; 
and that no officials are more efficient and patriotic, or collect their 
salaries more promptly than our members of Congress-these and a thousand 
other kindred touches and points, served to give pungency to the lecture. 
In the didactive portions he was not so effective, his voice and style not 
being favorable to the expression of sentiment or pathos.


    "Mark Twain" in a certain grotesque fanciful humor reminds one of 
"Artemus Ward," and though not in any sense an imitator, his humorous 
description of the inconveniences and perplexities experienced by the 
Sultan with his surplusage of wives, was much in the same vein as 
"A. Ward's" description of the kindred tribulations of Brigham Young.


   In person Mr. Clemens is not the kind of man the spectator "expected to see." Of 
medium size, a cast-iron inflexibility of feature, grave face, eyes that 
lack expression from their neutral hue, and the light color of the brows, a 
drawling speech, and a general air of being about halfasleep, "Mark Twain" has 
a very unpromising look for humor. Many of the audience last night supposed that 
his slowness of speech and movement was stage mannerism, but that was a mistake. 
That imperturbable drawl is habitual to him; and he is probably the laziest 
walker that ever stepped. In his most fluent and vivacious moods he has never been 
known to disgorge more than ten words per minute; and the saunter of Walt Whitman 
is a race-horse pace compared with his snail-like progress over the ground.
